Newsletters: add 296 (2024-04-03) (#1586)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _topics/en/time-warp.md

## Optional.  Same format as "primary_sources" above
see_also:
  - title: Consensus cleanup soft fork proposal
    link: topic consensus cleanup

## Optional.  Force the display (true) or non-display (false) of stub
## topic notice.  Default is to display if the page.content is below a
## threshold word count
#stub: false

## Required.  Use Markdown formatting.  Only one paragraph.  No links allowed.
## Should be less than 500 characters
excerpt: >
  **Time warp** is an exploit of Bitcoin's difficulty adjustment
  algorithm that allows miners controlling a large amount of hashrate to
  prevent difficulty from increasing even as the rate of block
  production increases.

---
Ignoring some technical details, Bitcoin's difficulty adjustment
algorithm (DAA) attempts to keep an average of ten minutes between
new blocks by adjusting the difficulty of the proof of work (PoW) that
blocks must demonstrate in order to be valid.  This depends on miners
including the (approximate) current time in the block headers they
create, so that the Bitcoin consensus protocol can calculate how much the
recent inter-block average differs from the ideal of ten minutes.

> Consensus rules prevent a single miner, or small number of miners, from
> including manipulative times in their block headers by requiring that
> any time in a block header must be greater than the median time of the
> previous 11 blocks, called the _median time past_ (MTP) rule.

Reviewer: Since this only prevents manipulation in one direction, maybe:

```suggestion
Consensus rules prevent a single miner, or small number of miners, from
including severely under-reporting the timestamp in their block headers by requiring that
any time in a block header must be greater than the median time of the
previous 11 blocks, called the _median time past_ (MTP) rule.
```

begin a time warp attack cannot significantly affect difficulty for the
first 2016-block epoch because both the first and last blocks in that
epoch will need to have approximately accurate times.  For the second
epoch, miners can make it appear that the first block was mined two
weeks in the past and the last block was mined at present, giving an
average of about 20 minutes per block and causing the DAA to halve the
difficulty.  Miners will then by able to complete the next epoch twice
as fast and yet make it seem like it took about 25 minutes per block,
lowering difficulty further.  They can repeat the attack indefinitely
until they're producing one block per second, the lower bound allowed by
the MTP rule.

## Consequences

The original reason to fear the attack was that miners could use it to
quickly claim all remaining block subsidy.  The attack takes about a
month of publicly visible preparation before it really gets going, at
which point it would only take miners about another month to claim all
remaining subsidy, which was valued at approximately $91 billion USD at
the time of this writing (April 2024).

Since the discovery of the attack, a significant amount of user funds

> (but believed to be far less than $91 billion) is new stored in contract
> protocols that use [timelocks][topic timelocks].  Since the activation of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(but believed to be far less than $91 billion) is now stored in contract
protocols that use [timelocks][topic timelocks].  Since the activation of
```

[BIP113][], those contracts all depend on MTP rather than block header
time.  During a time warp attack, MTP increases significantly slower
than normally, so funds could be made inaccessible to their users for
much longer than they expected or could potentially lead to users losing
money (depending on the contract).

The time warp attack would also result in much faster creation of new

> blocks than expected, making it easy to overwhelm nodes.  With a reduced

Reviewer: How would the nodes be overwhelmed? Perhaps:

```suggestion
blocks than expected, making it easy to outpace nodes’ synchronization speed.  With a reduced
```

number of nodes on the network, many other attacks would be easier,
including [eclipse attacks][topic eclipse attacks] and unwanted

> consensus changes.  A high rate of block production could also simply
> render Bitcoin unusable.

Reviewer: In what way would it become unusable? Perhaps:

```suggestion
consensus changes.  A high rate of block production could also simply
render Bitcoin unusable by preventing miners from converging on a single best chain, forcing nodes to frequently reorganize and making confirmation completely unreliable.
```

## Proposed use as an upgrade mechanism

A 2018 proposal called [forward blocks][news16 forward blocks] proposed
changing the consensus rules to deliberately encourage miners to perform
a timewarp to produce blocks more quickly.  Those blocks would commit to
essential transaction data, such as amounts and previous transaction,
allowing non-upgraded full nodes to continue verifying consensus rules

> such as the 21 million bitcoin limit.  Upgrade nodes would look for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as the 21 million bitcoin limit.  Upgraded nodes would look for
```

other transaction data, such as signatures, in _extension blocks_ that
would not be seen by older nodes.  This could increase the maximum
number of confirmed transactions on the network using only a
backwards-compatible soft fork.

We're unaware of any continued research or development of this idea for
Bitcoin.

## Solutions

> Because the set up for the attack is public, takes about a month, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the setup for the attack is public, takes about a month, and
```
